sqlite3 db/election.db
What do you think the db/ prefix is for?

Because the terminal is currently located at the root directory of the project, we must add the db/ prefix to place the new file in the db folder. Without this instruction, the file would be generated in the root directory.

Notice that the prompt in the terminal has changed. It will now look like the following image:

.database
This will display the absolute path to the connected database. Notice the period character (.) in the .database command. All of SQLite's internal commands begin with a period, to distinguish them from SQL queries. You can see all of them by typing .help.

Another useful dot command is .quit, which quits SQLite. Type it now to return to your terminal session.

Now you can use SQLite's .open command to open election.db, as shown in the following code block:

.open db/election.db
Excellent. You've successfully created the first database. It doesn't contain any data yet, but it will soon! 
The big takeaways are that the election.db file will store the tables we're about to create and that the SQLite CLI connects to this database. 
Now it's time to create a table!

We've decided to start with the candidates table, which will include first name, last name, and a Boolean value to track whether candidates are industry connected—an important consideration in the tech community.

The SQL statement to create a table is, appropriately, CREATE TABLE. It is followed by the specification for the table you want to create.


CREATE TABLE candidates (
  id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY,
  first_name VARCHAR(30) NOT NULL,
  last_name VARCHAR(30) NOT NULL,
  industry_connected BOOLEAN NOT NULL
);'

We verified the database file we were working in using the .database SQLite command.
 To see the tables of a database, type .schema into the SQLite CLI.
 You should see something like the following image:

 INSERT INTO candidates (first_name, last_name, industry_connected)
VALUES ('Ronald', 'Firbank', 1);
to load data

.headers on
.mode column
SELECT * FROM candidates;
The .mode column command formats the table in columns for a more legible display.

Now suppose we wish to retrieve only specific column values from the table, like just the first_name and last_name. 
SELECT first_name, last_name FROM candidates;

Suppose next that we want to find, by first name, all the candidates who are industry_connected.
 The WHERE clause enables us to conditionally filter through the data in the table.
 Let's illustrate this point by typing the following SQL statement:

SELECT first_name, industry_connected
FROM candidates
WHERE industry_connected = 1;

SELECT first_name, last_name, industry_connected
FROM candidates
WHERE id = 5;

It would be nice if we could store these SQL statements and then share the files.
In this step, we'll do just that. We'll create a file for table creation called schema.sql and a file for data insertion called seeds.sql.
 We'll use these files to create and populate the candidates table.

 The < is called the input redirect. This will override the default standard input, which is the keyboard,
  and allows the input to come from a file instead. This is not a feature of SQLite but a feature of the shell running in your terminal. 
 It's like loading a bunch of pretyped commands into sqlite3!

 Next we'll follow the same process, but with the seeds.sql file to populate the candidates table with data.

 It is also common to need to change the data for a particular row. 
 Perhaps a name was misspelled or a candidate who was previously lacking an industry connection has one now. 
 To handle this type of change, we can use an UPDATE statement. 
 In the next step, let's assume that the candidate Piers Gaveston has acquired a new industry connection and wishes to update his info.

 UPDATE candidates
SET industry_connected = 1
WHERE id = 3;

DELETE FROM candidates
WHERE first_name = "Montague";

.shell cls clears commands

sqlite3 db/election.db < db/seeds.sql copy from one sql file to another database file

Let's also include the jest package so that we can test in the development phase. 
Let's place this package in devDependencies so that it's not included in the production environment. Use the following command for that:

npm install jest --save-dev

This statement sets the execution mode to verbose to produce messages in the terminal regarding the state of the runtime.
 This feature can help explain what the application is doing, specifically SQLite.

 Now let's add the code that will connect the application to the SQLite database. 
 Add the following expression under the Express.js middleware section in server.js, directly following app.use(express.json());:

// Connect to database
const db = new sqlite3.Database('./db/election.db', err => {
  if (err) {
    return console.error(err.message);
  }

  console.log('Connected to the election database.');
});

To ensure that the Express.js server doesn't start before the connection to the database has been established, 
let's wrap the Express.js server connection located at the bottom of the server.js file in an event handler, as shown here:

// Start server after DB connection
db.on('open', () => {
  app.listen(PORT, () => {
    console.log(`Server running on port ${PORT}`);
  });
});


The method run() will execute an SQL query but won't retrieve any result data.

The question mark (?) denotes a placeholder, making this a prepared statement.
 Prepared statements can have placeholders that can be filled in dynamically with real values at runtime.

 An additional param argument can provide values for prepared statement placeholders. 
 Here, we're hardcoding 1 temporarily to demonstrate how prepared statements work. 
 If we need additional placeholders, the param argument can be an array that holds multiple values.

 We'll keep the this.changes value to verify whether the SQL query made changes to the candidates table.

 This is why we received the error SQLITE CONSTRAINT. 
 This is the PRIMARY KEY constraint at work, protecting the table from duplicate ids.

This is known as a foreign key. A foreign key is a field in one table that references the primary key of another table. 
In this case, Ronald Firbank's row in candidates would include a field with the number 1,
 but we'd know that that refers to a row in the parties table with the same id value. 
 Take a look at the following image to better understand the relationship:


Enter the ALTER TABLE statement. This statement allows you to add a new field, delete an existing field, or modify a field.

ALTER TABLE candidates ADD COLUMN party_id INTEGER UNSIGNED;

We've added a new line to the table called a constraint. 
This allows us to flag the party_id field as an official foreign key and tells SQL which table and field it references. 
In this case, it references the id field in the parties table.
 This ensures that no id can be inserted into the candidates table if it doesn't also exist in the parties table. 
SQLite will return an error for any operation that would violate a constraint.

CREATE TABLE candidates (
  id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY,
  first_name VARCHAR(30) NOT NULL,
  last_name VARCHAR(30) NOT NULL,
  industry_connected BOOLEAN NOT NULL,
  party_id INTEGER UNSIGNED,
  CONSTRAINT fk_party FOREIGN KEY (party_id) REFERENCES parties(id) ON DELETE SET NULL
);

we added ON DELETE SET NULL to tell SQL to set a candidate's party_id field to NULL if the corresponding row in parties is ever deleted.
A word of warning, though: The SQLite command line does not enable foreign key constraints by default.
 You'll need to turn this on with the statement PRAGMA foreign_keys = ON every time you restart SQLite.
 (Don't worry, the sqlite3 npm package will enable this for us.)

 When added to a SELECT statement, a JOIN can merge two or more tables together, filling in the foreign keys with the actual data.

SELECT * FROM candidates
LEFT JOIN parties ON candidates.party_id = parties.id;
We can use SQL's JOIN statement to do this for us. When added to a SELECT statement,
 a JOIN can merge two or more tables together, filling in the foreign keys with the actual data.

There are a few different ways JOIN statements can be used. 
You can retrieve only the rows that have matching id's from both tables, 
all of the rows from one table and only the matching data from another, etc. 


 SELECT candidates.*, parties.name AS party_name
FROM candidates
LEFT JOIN parties ON candidates.party_id = parties.id;
The AS keyword lets you define an alias for your data, which is particularly useful when joining tables that might have overlapping field names.

What request type would be appropriate for updating data? We've established that GET is for reading, POST for creating, and DELETE for deleting.
 None of those make sense for updating, but there is a fourth request type we can use: the PUT request.

 The front-end team wanted the data returned in alphabetical order by last name. We could use JavaScript and the Array.prototype.sort() 
 method before sending the response back, but why do that when SQL has sort options built in?

 In SQL, rows can be sorted on retrieval simply by including an ORDER BY clause. If you want to sort the data in descending order 
 (i.e., starting at Z instead of A), you can add a DESC keyword (e.g., ORDER BY last_name DESC).

 -- get all voters who do not have a last name of Cooper or Jarman
SELECT * FROM voters WHERE last_name != 'Cooper' AND last_name != 'Jarman';

-- get all voters who have a .edu email address
SELECT * FROM voters WHERE email LIKE '%.edu';

-- get only the last created voter
SELECT * FROM voters ORDER BY created_at DESC LIMIT 1;

post request take body in the arguments

The ? prepared statements will protect us from malicious data, but we should also do our best to prevent blank records from being created. 
In the same POST route, add the following code right before the sql variable declaration: